[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, when I was a young child,
like, four or five years old,
I remember very
clearly reading a book,
and it was called, The
Boy Who Sang to the World.
In this book, a boy
would sing to the world,
and he would sing
their dreams come true.
I lost the book, and
then I started searching,
and there no such book exists.
I was reading it in some
other realm of consciousness.
And for me, that's
what I became,
was the boy who
sang to the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think that the entire human
collective is in a dark night
of the soul right now.
The despair and the
hopelessness of humanity
is just breathtaking
and beyond words,
and the ecosystem is screaming,
and no one knows what to do.
My only hope is you hit that
dark point of no return,
and you are in it for a while,
and then something turns.
And new ideas will bubble up,
new solutions will come forward
for us to change the
course of our history,
and we'll come out of the
depths of the human heart
and mind in a way that
we can't anticipate.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
The ancient traditions,
they all speak to it.
The mystery in Genesis-- in
the beginning was the word,
and the word said,
let there be light.
So before light, there was sound
vibration, or vibration itself.
And in the Vedic traditions
of ancient India,
Brahma uttered
the sound ohm, and
everything came into existence.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
The first movement
of a particle,
when it starts to vibrate,
it creates a frequency,
and it's a sound or a vibration.
From the smallest
subatomic particle
to the largest galaxies--
including our bodies--
it began with sound.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
[BELL RINGING]
[LAUGHTER]
I believe that we emerge from
the infinite into the finite,
and it's different
experiences for each of us
as we make that transition.
Research clearly shows that one
of the first senses to emerge
is the sense of hearing.
When we're little
fetuses developing,
we are hearing the world
through the liquid medium
of our mother's womb.
For me, I was a
forceps delivery,
so my first experience
of life in this planet
was something grabbing my
head and pulling me out,
so I was in a kind of shock,
and I think that shock extended
past my birth to my early years,
and think this picture of me
with Santa Claus captures the
essence of my early experience
in life.
I mean, can't you just see?
I'm like, oh my god, where am I?
I would say my earliest
experience is swinging
on a swing that my dad made for
me from a limb of an oak tree,
and I would stay out
there for hours, singing.
And I would sing to the sun,
and the sun would hear me,
and I would sing to the moon.
I would love to stay
up when it got dark,
and I would sing to
the moon and the stars,
and I knew they could hear me.
So I lived in a
world where I could
sing to beings and celestial
objects, and they responded.
[SOUND OF CAR STARTING]
When I was 12 years-old, our
family had a financial crisis,
so we had to move into a teeny
tiny efficiency apartment
by the ocean in the winter,
because rents are really cheap.
And there was a rec
room underneath that
had great acoustics.
It would make, like,
echoes, and I love echoes.
And so I would go
down there and sing,
and would travel on the sound.
I didn't know what I was
doing at 12 years-old,
but I would just be lost
there for a long, long period
of time.
And one day, the door opened and
a man stepped in that I'd never
seen before in the
complex, and he said,
I don't mean to
startle you, but I
came to tell you that you're
going to heal many people
in this world with that voice.
And then he turned and left,
and I never saw him again.
This is [INAUDIBLE]
and [INAUDIBLE].
They're Bodhisattva figures.
They're from our
love of Thailand,
and so they guard the passage
with amusing compassion.
And to Kuan Yin.
Kuan Yin is the one who hears
the suffering of the world.
Sacred to the Taoist and
also to the Buddhist.
And then over here, we
have the sacred frog.
The king of the frogs.
He's an amphibian, so
he goes under water
into the depths of
the unconscious,
and he can also
come to the surface.
And we have the two frogs
making out up on the hill.
And then we have the
creature of the woods.
He's the guardian.
He's like a Druid figure.
And this is one
of my favorites--
Our Lady of Guadalupe.
Beautiful, beautiful being.
And up here we have a
figure that's hiding.
This is a Ganesh.
He's the son of
Shiva and Parvati,
so represents the part of us
that can overcome obstacles.
Our two gargoyles.
This one watches
people who come in.
This one is still sulking.
He's just-- he's been
that way since we got him,
but we love him anyways.
And then we got this for
Halloween several years ago,
and just left it up.
And I kind of like it.
It's just a reminder.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SINGING) The Countess of your
heart, yes, and the [INAUDIBLE]
waits for you by
the stream to carry
you into the land of dreams.
[BIG  BAND MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, my mother was a
professional singer,
so that's where, actually,
my voice came from.
And she sang with the
big bands in the 1940s.
She was actually a
circus elephant rider,
and in those days, the
circus would come into town,
and she was the one who rode
the elephant for that circus.
And then when the show
began, in between the acts,
the big band would
play, and she'd sing.
So she was always singing.
And I just started singing
in church, in choirs,
and then a crucial period came
when I individuated from my mom
and decided to get a guitar.
And for her, that was
a evil instrument,
because in the bands, the people
that she saw playing guitar
were drug addicts.
So she thought that if
I picked up the guitar,
I would become a drug addict.
And of course, this was
the time of folk music,
and that was really
what I was moving into,
so I had to save up
my money, because she
refused to buy me a guitar.
She said, if you're
going to have a guitar,
you must get it yourself.
One night I went into
a lounge, and they
had, like, amateur
night or something,
and I played, and
they offered me a job,
so I became a lounge singer.
So I would play
guitar and piano.
So I performed at the place
underneath the Chinese
restaurant, and two friends
of mine-- Marty and Kim--
helped run it.
And I think he was hanging
sheet rock at the time,
and went into this story about
how his landlady was kicking
him out, and then he sang,
Can't Find My Way Home,
and so I went up to
Marty, I said, this guy
doesn't have any place to live.
Let's ask him to live with
us, and we did that night.
We did.
And he came and he
lived with us for about--
A couple--
--a year and a
half, two years.
Yeah, year and and
a half, or two years.
He was writing a lot
of music at that point,
and he really was hoping that
he would make it as a singer.
I was really into pop rock,
but I didn't have the resources
to get to Los Angeles.
I lived in North Carolina,
so Nashville was closer.
So I started writing
country songs.
And I went to Nashville,
and worked in restaurants,
and gigs-- music gigs.
And the really weird thing was
that the record engineer guys--
I would go in for sessions,
and they would say,
you're really, really good.
You're really talented.
Just wait-- somebody's
going to pick you up.
It was autumn--
early autumn-- and I
was walking across a cow
pasture of my uncle's
farm in North Carolina.
And I sat underneath a
tree, I folded my legs
in like a half Lotus-- I didn't
even know what I was doing--
and then my hands
went spontaneously
into these mudras.
And I'm sitting there
underneath the tree like a Yogi
from Muskogee, and my hands
are doing these weird mudras.
I went into a deep place
and the world disappeared.
I had no sensory
experience of the world.
I thought it lasted
for a few moments,
but when I opened my
eyes, the sun was setting,
so several hours had passed.
And several cows
had wandered over
and were staring at me,
when I opened my eyes.
For whatever reason, a white boy
is walking across a cow pasture
one autumn afternoon,
and goes into
a spontaneous yogic samadhi,
and experiences Sat Chit Ananda.
And the impact of
that was so profound
that for hours afterwards I
was in love with the world.
I could feel the
love of everything,
and I was a deep place
of contentment and peace.
I didn't even know what samadhi
was or what [INAUDIBLE] were,
and so I started to search
for what the meaning
was of that experience.
I started researching
and studying,
and discovered the
mystic contemplatives
of the Middle Ages.
They were describing something
of what I had experienced,
but with not the
complete picture.
But one of the roots of
that spiritual tradition
is contemplative, and
is an inner journey,
and that's what I
became interested in.
So I went to a Catholic
college for two years,
because I thought
that I was going
to become a Trappist monk.
And I was drawn to the Trappists
because they're a silent order,
which would be ironic
if I had become
a Trappist, with a voice,
and I would become silent.
Shhh.
TOM KENYON: I went to the mass,
and I was mesmerized, and fell
in love with the
mass-- with the Latin,
and the incense, and the
gold, and the pageantry,
the stained glass.
And then it just so happened
that they did the mass
in English, and
for the first time,
I heard what they
were actually saying.
And I could not
accept that reality,
because it was guilt and shame.
Guilt and shame.
Mea culpa, mea culpa,
mea maxima culpa.
I just couldn't accept
that, because when
I went into these
mystical experiences
and I was with St. Teresa,
or I was with St. Francis,
or I was with Mary-- I had a
lot of experiences with Mary,
the mother-- there
was no shame and there
was no guilt from any of them.
It was a pure agape-- pure
love-- without any condition.
So I was having these mystical
experiences that were typical
of people in the 13th,
14th, 15th centuries,
and I'm living in a 20th century
world, and that was a mismatch.
So I left the church behind.
And the quest was about
understanding what
mystical experiences were,
and bringing the human
and the divine together.
Can you bring them together?
Sophia means wisdom.
The Gnostics say that Sophia
is actually the heroine
and the protector of humanity.
She's said to be the
feminine counterpart to God.
-[INAUDIBLE]
-Yes.
It would.
[BELLS RINGING]
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
(SINGING) Sophia,
Sophia, Sophia.
I continued my education at the
University of North Carolina,
Greensboro, minored
in psychology,
and I was taking a class on
psychosis, which is, basically,
the mental state
where a person is
seeing things that
aren't there, and hearing
things that aren't there.
But I remember it
was a spring day,
and I'm on my way-- I was
on my way to this class,
and I had read the notes, so I
knew what it was talking about.
And on either side
of me are two angels,
suddenly, out of the blue.
Complete with the
frigging wings.
They're about nine feet
tall, with white wings--
brilliant white-- emanating
white light brilliantly.
Now, I was aware that it was
a mental impression, so it
was not a true hallucination.
In other words, I was aware
that it was coming from somehow
in my mind, but I experienced
them as physically
real outside of me.
And so I became
absolutely freaked out,
like, I'm going to a
class on psychosis,
and two angels are
walking beside me.
What if I walk in the
class and nobody sees them?
Or, worse, what if I walk in the
class and people do see them?
How do I explain them?
And what was really
weird in that
moment was I felt this immense
love coming from them that was
just, like, melting me, but my
paranoia about who they were,
and what was this, and are
they real, was so big, I said,
you guys have to go away, and
they-- poof-- they disappeared.
I went into psychology,
looking back at it,
to discover if
maybe I was crazy.
And I found among my fellow
students that many of us
were in the psych
department for that reason.
I lived in an old
dilapidated house
that should've been condemned.
I had a mattress on
one corner of the room,
and there was half
written papers, and books,
and laundry, and
food, and dust balls,
and the whole
thing of a student.
And on the other
side of the room,
I had an altar, and pictures
of the saints of all
the traditions I was
exploring, and a prayer rug,
and it was pristine.
And there was this tension
between me as Tom the person
and Tom the aspiring yogi.
And so really the quest was, how
do you bring the two together?
There were several incidences in
my education at the university
that were significant for me.
One of them was the discovery
that your physiology
could be used as a language to
explain mystical experiences.
The whole time while I was going
through my scientific training,
I was going deeper into
the mysticism of the East.
The yoga of India,
Taosim of China,
Egyptian alchemy,
Tibetan Buddhism.
I was practicing
every meditation
from every tradition.
I would sometimes
spend five hours a day
meditating different practices.
And so I was changing
my neurophysiology
and not realizing it.
So I had been doing Kundalini
practices along with everything
else, and it was spring, people
were in the quadrangle throwing
Frisbees, there were
high-rise dorms,
and I was sitting there just
enjoying everything, and then
all of a sudden I hear this--
[RATTLESNAKE SOUND]
--sound, that goes right
up my spine, like a snake.
And of course, in
symbolism, Kundalini shakti
is symbolized as a cobra.
And that's because, as the
energy rises up the spine, when
it hits the brain, it spreads
out like the hood of a cobra,
and what it's doing is actually
going through both hemispheres
of the brain.
And this shakti-- this
immense electric charge--
was going into my brain, and
just lit up all these centers.
My experience was that the
dorms became transparent.
I could see through the walls,
and I could feel every emotion
of all the thousand
or so students that
were in the area-- their
hopes, their dreams,
their fears, going into
exams, all that stuff.
And then I started-- then
I heard the sound again--
[RATTLESNAKE SOUND]
--and another surge
went up into my brain,
and I felt really hot,
like burning up-- it's
called psychic fire
in the tradition.
But I didn't know what it was.
And so I start to
walk back to the dorm,
and as I'm going
back to the dorm,
my friends are going to lunch,
and they're walking by me,
and say, come on with us, Tom.
And I say, no, I can't, I'm
going to go back and lie down.
Well, what was weird was, it
was like my perception was
they were in a different movie.
I could see the movie, but I
couldn't step into their movie.
I was another movie.
So I am hot.
I'm so hot, I want
to go to the dorm
and just get a cold shower,
and then I'm getting so weak,
it's like I have
no energy to move.
And I look, and it's-- I look
to the right, and that's where
the student health center is.
And my dorm is about
another 500 yards away,
and the student health
center is right here,
and I feel like I'm--
literally, the life
force is draining out of me.
So I walk towards
the health center,
and literally, the energy
leaves my arms and my hands,
and I have to crawl in onto
the porch-- I'm crawling in--
and this is really
bizarre-- I'm crawling
into the health center.
And I sit in a chair,
and the nurse comes in,
and I show her my ID.
She takes my temperature
and she turns ashen white.
All I remember is her
eyes got really wide,
and her color changed,
and she ran off.
In comes the doctor, and
the next thing I know,
I'm in a private
room, and they're
giving me whatever medicine.
I still, , to this
day, don't know what
medicines they're giving me.
Fortunately, I didn't say
anything about a snake going up
my spine, or seeing through
the walls of the dorms,
or any of that.
What I presented was a fever.
So they put me in
a medical wing,
not the psychological wing.
And so for three
days I was delirious.
Because what my understanding
of what happened
was, that the Kundalini
had gone into an area
of my neurophysiology-- subtle
neurophysiology-- the chakra
system and the
nadis, where there
were impurities, because I had
not prepared myself properly.
I had pushed the river.
And for three days
I was in a state
of delirium and a high fever.
And I remember the images
vividly to this day.
There were two sets of them.
One was I was on a raft
floating on an ocean--
a vast ocean with dark
clouds, with sea monsters
trying to grab me
off of the raft
and pull me down
into the depths.
That's classic
Jungian psychology.
The ocean is the
unconscious, it was stirred,
and emotions, and all of that.
And this went on for three days.
And then the other vision was, I
would be driving along a desert
in my grandfather's
Ford, and I would
see the sunset in the hub of
the wheel-- the steering wheel.
And off in the distance
was a little, like,
an adobe in the desert, and
I knew that in that house
was somebody who knew the
secret of the universe.
And as I got closer,
it would hop away,
and I could never get to it.
And then I came out
of the delirium,
and I was weak for
about six weeks,
to regain my strength,
from a premature experience
with Kundalini shakti.
So I became very respectful
of this primordial power.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
Sound vibrations speaks to our
souls, it speaks to our bodies,
it bypasses the cognitive
mind, and when that happens,
a door opens, and people
can go through that door,
and discover miracles and
mysteries in themselves
that they never imagined.
So after my
undergraduate degree,
I went to California to study
something called whole brain
learning, which is
a method for using
music, sound, and
frequency to open up
latent potentials of the brain.
And so I had this body
of knowledge about sound
and how it could affect altered
states of consciousness,
and psychological
counseling, and
different psychological states.
And the challenge, for me, was
to bring those two together.
And I discovered the work
of Losanov of Bulgaria--
the Losanov Institute.
And he was documenting how music
could increase alpha activity,
which is a precursor to the
lower brain activity of theta,
and this is the range
of hypnotic states
of consciousness.
So as a therapist
I was fascinated,
and also being a musician.
[MUSIC - JOHANNES BRAHMS "CRADLE
SONG"]
And there was a study done
with premature babies,
and Brahms' Lullaby was
played to a control group,
and Brahms' Lullaby was not
played to another group.
And what happened with the
Brahms' babies was that they
were released from the hospital
an average of a week earlier,
had fewer complications,
and thrived
better than the other babies.
And what it turns out to be is
that the structure of the music
of Brahms-- these
particular pieces-- soothed
the nervous system,
increased alpha activity,
and again, when you have an
increase of alpha activities,
there's a decrease of
blood pressure, heart rate,
respiration, stress hormones.
And the sound, the music, the
structure, the architecture,
the tambor-- the sound
quality of the instruments--
the rhythm, very
importantly, and the melody
soothed the brain and
created this increase
of alpha response.
So the babies were having an
opportunity for self-healing,
and that's really
what was occurring.
So I formed Acoustic
Brain Research in 1983
to scientifically
look at how music
and sound affect the brain.
And this was a loose
collection of researchers
all over the country--
universities,
independent labs--
looking at sound patterns
that I would compose,
and look at how
it would affect the brain,
mostly through EEG studies.
So I started writing
music for my clients
to accelerate
therapy, and to reach
deeper states of consciousness.
Most of us have one
part of the brain that
is more dominant than
the other in terms
of filtering the experience.
And for some people,
that's the left.
And that's the logical,
sequential side.
Then the other side of the
brain-- the right hemisphere--
is spatial intelligence.
It's actually very
happy with paradox,
and it's comfortable where
two things that are opposite
exist simultaneously.
The left brain can't stand that.
And the brain research shows
that when you are experiencing
pure sound without language,
the right side of the brain
lights up like a Christmas tree.
And all types of phenomena
occur in the right hemisphere
that do not occur over here
in the left hemisphere.
So let's start with
a sound meditation
to bring us all
to the same space.
When your mind wanders,
simply bring it back.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
The ability to go
into a mystical state
of consciousness or receptive
creative state of consciousness
is a brain skill.
It's like typing.
Learning to ride a bike.
Anybody can learn it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Every human being
has that capacity,
and every human
being who has a voice
has the capacity to use that
voice to heal themselves
and another person.
Not even in something
external like sound healing,
but in how we speak
to each other.
The words we choose.
The tonality that we choose.
And we're creating the world
by how we speak to each other.
And then I had an encounter that
was totally unexpected, and out
of the blue, and
uninvited with a group
of beings called the Hathors.
I'd worked in brain
research for about 13 years
before I encountered
the Hathors,
so I had some understanding
of how sound and music affect
the braih-- that was my focus.
And I had, I thought, some
idea of what reality was,
and altered states of
consciousness-- that's
the field that I worked in.
And so then these beings showed
up in a meditation retreat--
I was doing a Siddha Yoga
retreat-- silent, by myself,
nobody else around.
And so they said they came
from another universe,
and so my mind was,
like, this is insanity.
So I was having these psychic
experiences with the Hathors
and hearing psychic
communications.
I see them as a
mental impression.
One is observing, and there's
one that speaks, and he says,
we are the Hathors,
and we come with love,
and the sounding of a new
reality for your Earth.
OK.
Now, where are you from?
We're from Venus.
Great.
Just fucking great.
I'm talking to an imaginary
beings who are from Venus.
So I was convinced that
this was a delusion.
I was a practicing
psychotherapist
in North Carolina.
I had PhD supervisors,
and I had my niche.
And so then I had to think of
them-- OK, they're archetypes.
I went to my Jungian training.
They're simply archetypes,
so they're not real.
They claim they're
real, but they're
not really real, you know,
they're aspects of the mind.
Creative, resourceful,
yes, but not real.
Thank you, I've
got them in a box.
I'm comfortable with it.
So nobody knew about
this part of my life.
So I never peeped a word.
And then they said, we'd
like you to write a book.
I said, yeah, right.
I'm going to put my hard earned
credentials-- my sacred letters
that go after my name--
on a book about weirdos
from another universe
that live on Venus,
and came through Sirius to
come in and help balance
this universe for this time.
Yeah, right.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
And they gave me some
information about geometry
in the brain-- information
that I didn't know,
but I recognized as significant.
Because they were
talking about the brain,
and the geometry
of consciousness,
and relationship to
sound and emotion.
And I found all this
stuff very intriguing.
And said, if I taught
this to some people,
I would observe rapid change--
improvement-- in brain
function and creativity.
And I did tests--
three beta test sites--
and by god, that's
exactly what happened.
It was amazing.
So I had to acknowledge
this information, although I
couldn't buy that
it came from who
they said they were, because it
was too outside the box for me.
But the information is valid.
And then I was in
California doing a workshop
with the Hathors, and they
were starting to tone--
they were having me tone-- and
they would bring these sounds
through, and that's
what really opened
up the sound work as it is now.
[GONG]
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
I've become like a tuning
fork to the information
that is coming to me.
In shamanism, they call it being
the hollow reed, so what I do
is to step out of the way.
And in terms of
brain frequencies,
I would say I go
into an alpha state,
and in that state of
alpha, I can attend
to what I need to do
vocally, but for that moment,
I surrender my
voice to the energy.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
When I started working
shamanically with the drums,
then the whole shamanic
world opened up. d
And the animal spirits can come
through my voice, and shamans,
and beings from
other traditions.
Sometimes I'll
just look over here
and I'll see 12, 13 shamans
all with their drums.
Or there'll be 108 lamas when
I'm in the Tibetan tradition.
I feel like sometimes
I'm like a doorway.
I just open the door.
Or I'm a chauffeur, and I
look in the backseat to see
who I'm driving at the moment.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
INTERVIEWER: What do
you say to people--
or maybe you don't
say to people--
that think this is just nuts.
I mean, you must--
I agree with them.
And I move in two
diametrically opposed worlds.
Yeah.
I think of myself as a
brain researcher, a musician,
I'm logical in how
I look at things.
So I'm fascinated with neurology
and what goes on in the brain,
and there's this
other side that is,
well, I call it off the
charts into woo woo land.
And so, for me, a
lot of stuff is nuts.
[SOUND OF WHALES]
I never know when the
whales are going to show up,
but as I was doing
the pure tones,
I could hear-- I could
see them approaching--
psychically approaching--
and they're humpbacks.
And so all of a sudden,
for me, psychically,
obviously, I'm in my right
hemisphere-- an increase
of activity.
This is not normal
consciousness.
I'm in an altered state that
I see the whales coming,
and then they enter my-- one
of them enters my energy field,
and I become very large.
I become, for me, subjectively,
as large as a whale, which
is very interesting, because I'm
also aware of my physical body
at the same time.
So here I am, doing the
little bowl, and me as Tom,
and there's this huge
giant whale with flippers
here on the stage.
And I mean, there's
literally-- I
have those two dual
realities, and then the whale
sounds come through me.
[SOUND OF WHALES]
I'm actually a neopagan, Taoist,
Tibetan Buddhist, agnostic,
quantum physicist,
mystic all rolled
into some strange amalgam.
[BELL RINGING]
When I turned 40, I was in
a intellectual wrestling
match with the Hathors.
And they had essentially
taken my view of reality
and expanded it so
far, I was pissed.
And I was not
comfortable with what
they said the nature
of reality was,
and so I was challenging them.
And on the morning of my 40th
birthday, they said to me,
today is a very important day.
We're going to take you
through a major initiation.
And I said, well, you're going
to have to take me to the mat.
I'm not going to
participate with you.
I'm not going to do anything
to allow you access.
I'm not going to even
enter my inner domain.
I'm not even going to fricking
meditate this morning.
And I didn't for the
first time since I was 18.
And so I went to this park, late
afternoon, to watch the sunset
as kind of my
birthday celebration,
and I was just killing time
watching the sunset at Madrona
Pointe, and all of a sudden,
I heard this voice said,
now it is time.
And a hole opened
up underneath me,
and I started to
fall into the earth.
And it was so vivid, I grabbed
the ground and the grass.
But a part of me was falling
down into this tunnel,
down into the earth,
and as I fell through,
the first one I encountered
was an Aborigine with a fire
stick twirling it around
in, like, a circle,
and I could hear
the flames going--
[WHOOSHING NOISE]
--and he looked at me with these
dark black eyes, and said--
I have something to
ask you when you return.
TOM KENYON: And I
said, return from what?
And so I fall further
down into this tunnel,
and after some period of
time, I encounter something
that totally violated
my belief system,
which were the rock people.
And these rocks
were speaking to me.
They were like, crystalline
structures, and they said--
We have something to
ask you when you return.
TOM KENYON: And I
said, where am I going?
They said--
-You'll find out.
TOM KENYON: I'm
pulled further down.
And then I enter in what seems
to be the center of the Earth,
and there's this luminous
egg-shaped form, and as I
encounter it, it says to me--
I am the Earth dreamer.
There were two more of us,
but they have gone on to sing
new worlds into existence.
I'm about to change my dream,
and your Earth as you know it,
is about to change.
Will you sing the
song of the new Earth?
TOM KENYON: And I said,
well, I'm not sure.
And as soon as I said that--
poof-- I was, like, teleported,
pulled up out of the tunnel,
back from by the rock people,
and they said--
Will you sing the
song of the new Earth?
TOM KENYON: And I
said, I don't know.
[POOF]
On up.
And then I'm with the Aborigine,
and the fire stick is twirling,
and the sound is
still on my mind.
[WHOOSHING SOUND]
Are you willing to sing
the song of the new Earth?
TOM KENYON: And I
said, I'm not sure.
I'm back on the
surface, and I come to,
and I'm holding the
grass with my hands.
And so I say to
the Hathors, you're
going to have to do something
that I can experience
with my physical senses.
Otherwise, I'm
just going to think
this is, like, a stress
reaction and I'm losing my mind.
And they said, no problem.
And right then, this little
golf ball shaped ball of light
started spinning above the
ground-- about maybe two
or three inches
above the ground--
and I was seeing it
with my physical eyes.
It was clear it was not coming
from a mental impression.
But with my physical
eyes, I was seeing
this ball of light spinning.
And I was looking
at that, and then I
heard a rustle behind
me, and this sound
that I'd never heard before.
It was a cross between,
like, a whale and a bird.
And I looked, and I could
see the bush moving,
but I couldn't see what it was.
But I could hear the
sound, physically,
again with my physical senses.
And I got totally spooked
and I said, OK, that's good.
That's good enough.
Totally freaked me out.
And so I said, so what
exactly does it mean to sing
the song of the new Earth?
And they said, well, it will
mean that you will go around
the Earth many times,
singing sound patterns that
come to you from the Earth, and
from us to give to the Earth.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
The work with groups is
a type of sound healing,
and it is working
collectively with the energy
of a large gathering.
Each person will
respond to the sounds
in the ways that
are unique to them.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
I'm from Amarillo, Texas.
I've worked in the oil fields,
I've been a truck driver,
I've been a farmer.
Maintenance department at
a hospital for 20 years.
For most of my life,
I was in turmoil.
He's opened doors I
never even imagined.
For me, because I was
trained in a very scientific,
left-brained way, I didn't
have people who I could
talk to about these things.
As soon as I discovered
this, and came in,
and met these beautiful
people, and realized
that I can actually go
into this place within me,
and that's where
all the answers are.
It was all bull for me.
Far away stuff.
Total nonsense.
I totally negated all this.
And why could I do that?
I had no idea of what it was.
And then it happened that I sort
of stumbled into these things,
and in a way, it's like my
Earth went from flat to round.
I think sound is the
future of information.
Sound opens consciousness.
If consciousness is higher,
the planet will change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
TOM KENYON: Many people are
having a spiritual emergence.
And it's happening to
housewives, and generals, and
doctors, and all walks of life.
People are having--
suddenly, they sense things
that they never sensed
before-- experiences
of other beings,
other realms, and they
don't know what to do with it.
We don't, as a culture,
have a place to put that.
It's just like, in
the box of crazy.
Well, this is not crazy.
It's one aspect
of consciousness.
And if we could look
at with objectivity,
we can actually extract
things that are of value,
and then we change how
we live in the world.
And I believe that
we're in a place,
as a global consciousness,
as humanity,
that we are not going to
survive much longer as a species
if we don't change how
we are living our life.
And that's what
my work is about.
So we are joined together
for an extraordinary journey
into the mystery of sound, and
consciousness, and healing.
What we're going
to do is a group
experience with creating a sound
that comes out of an emotion.
So let's everybody
get-- just go inside
and get in touch with a feeling
of appreciation, however
that is for you.
And just breathe into it,
and just make a sound that
matches how you feel inside.
That's all it is.
[OM SOUND]
Something's
happening with people
that show up at these events.
It reminds me of the early days
when I was doing psychotherapy,
and I was amazed at
the transformation
and the beauty of the human
being to step into the unknown.
So we're going to
go into a cave,
and it will be a little
spooky, because there's
very little light down there.
But the being who resides
there is in the darkness.
Darkness is not evil.
The moon is as
important as the sun.
And we're going
into the darkness
to commune with a knowledge
and an intelligence that
will sing through my voice.
And we'll see what it is.
I have no idea what
will come forward.
-Oy.
-Yeah.
Be careful.
It's slippery.
[CHANTING IN NON ENGLISH
LANGUAGE]
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
So the being that
I just channeled
was enshrouded in darkness,
because he lives in the Earth.
He had a golden aura, and
he is very, very ancient,
and he has seen many human
civilizations come and go.
And he was deeply
saddened and dismayed
by how humans treat the Earth
and the beings of the Earth.
And his message is that human
beings must honor the Earth,
or they will not survive.
Early on, I started
having impressions
of mountains, and the
Himalayas, and what
I later recognized to be Tibet.
And what I experienced in
a very primal, direct way,
was that I was deeply connected
to Tibet, and to Padmasambhava,
who had brought Buddhism into
Tibet in the 7th century,
and also to Yeshe Tsogyal, who
was his tantric practitioner
that joined him.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
[CHANTING IN NON ENGLISH
LANGUAGE]
I was already
initiated into Buddhism,
and I had various relationships
with other teachers.
Japsang was the most
incredible encounter that I've
had in Tibetan Buddhism,
and I've had some pretty
extraordinary encounters.
He was a peer.
He was a guru in the
sense of the true guru.
Truest guru is the one
that resides in each of us,
but a true guru is someone who
is a bridge between the worlds,
and he can move back and
forth between the worlds.
And so I can go to him,
and ask him questions,
and he refines
various understandings
I have from his perspective.
[SINGING AND CHANTING]
The nuns in Tibet are
an extraordinary force.
I had no knowledge that nuns
chanted the way they chant,
and so I remember going to
the Gyantse Nunnery, which
is very remote, and hearing them
sing, and it was like this--
I was drunk.
I was drunk on the chants
coming out of these nuns.
[CHANTING]
And these are the
nuns of Gyantse.
These are the ones
that we're recording.
These are Gyantse.
Yeah.
And certain ones we've used,
like, for the CD and stuff,
like, you're familiar
with this, for instance.
Right.
It hit me like a ton of bricks.
In this world of
imbalance, nobody
had ever bothered to record
the voices of the women.
Nobody knew the nuns chanted.
Because of that work that
Judy envisioned, and the CD was
created, and all the
profits go back to the nuns,
they were able to repair a
wall that was a huge gap,
and expand the nunnery--
make it much larger.
They provided winter
robes for all the nuns,
because they were threadbare.
And two nuns could be
sent to medical school.
And that came out of
this vision that Judy
had to empower the
nuns, and that also it's
a beautiful expression
of the feminine,
because the feminine
is about relationship.
Well, the first
time the feminine
showed up for me as a reference
point was after my episode
when I was 18 in
my uncle's pasture.
I went into the Western
mystical contemplative tradition
very deeply, so I had these
many numinous experiences
with Mary, mother of Jesus.
So my personal journey was, as
I went deeper into mysticism--
the Christian contemplative
tradition-- there was
a place where there
was kind of a dead end,
because it did not explain
my experience that I
had when I was 18-- that
mystical experience.
So it took me into
the East, and there I
met these feminine
archetypes, these goddesses
in other traditions,
like Parvati,
[INAUDIBLE] of
Shiva and Saraswati,
and Lakshmi, and Kuan Yin,
and all these goddesses.
And I formed relationships
with them through meditation.
And my bhakti for
these goddesses
was so immense that when
I was in their presence,
I would be elevated, and then
I look at women on the Earth.
And in India, still to this
day, if the husband dies,
sometimes the woman is supposed
to-- in certain castes-- is
supposed to jump onto
the funeral pyre,
because she has no life
left when the husband dies.
And there are women that are
given clitorectomies in Africa.
So these horrendous things
are taking place in this world
against the feminine.
So as I began to look
at all this stuff--
the political, social,
the neurological,
and the spiritual
disempowerment of women,
and my place as a man in
the midst of all that--
how do I come to
terms with that?
The pivotal point
for me that pulled
all of these different things
together into one gestalt
was when I met Judi Sion.
I called, and I sounded like
somebody calling John Lennon.
I didn't know he sang.
I knew he was some
sort of a teacher.
And I called, and I left
a message, and I said,
I have an amazing friend, and
I need to find the most amazing
present, and I'm wondering
if you could be the Christmas
present for my friend.
And it hadn't been--
and I hung up the phone,
and thought, oh
my god, you fool.
And Tom called back.
So we went up to where Tom
was living at the time.
Hello.
How are you?
Fine and dandy.
And he unzips this suitcase, and
brings out this crystal bowl,
and I was like, huh,
I wonder what that is?
I wonder what he's going
to do with that thing?
And he started making sound,
and I went to another dimension.
That was the first time my
consciousness-- my brain
state-- had been
altered by sound.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
And Tom said, I just
need to tell you,
I don't, I don't,
I don't do this.
I said, you don't do what?
He said, I don't see
people in my home.
I don't do private sessions.
I was like, my first
thought was, well, then,
why did you do this?
And said that, being me.
Why am I here?
Why did you do this?
He said, because the
Hathors told me to.
There's a place on Route
1 where the Nottoway
River crosses Route 1.
And that was a bridge, I'm told,
that my birth father worked on,
and that's where
he met my mother.
We were on our way
to visit relatives.
TOM KENYON: We lived
in Norfolk, Virginia,
and my grandmother
and grandfather lived
in Greensboro, North Carolina.
So my mother, and I, and
my brother were on the bus.
JUDI SION: So I was
in the backseat,
and I just remember this--
coming alongside a bus,
and just looking over.
There was a little
boy in the window.
TOM KENYON: And I'm
sitting by the big window,
and I look down at a car.
JUDI SION: And our eyes locked.
And the cars moved at what
I call, flying formation.
It could have been
for five seconds.
for five minutes.
It seemed forever.
TOM KENYON: And so we're
just hovering there,
and I looked down and there's
this girl who's about my age,
and it was like, oh, hello.
JUDI SION: Deep
in his eyes, there
was something-- I knew
that little boy was
going to play guitar, and
I knew that little boy
was going to sing.
TOM KENYON: And then
the car passes the bus.
And so I happened to write
about it when I was writing
my story for The
Magdalen Manuscript,
because it struck my heart
at such a deep level.
But what happened was that,
when Tom read my story,
he said, wow.
That same thing happened to
me when I was a little boy.
I said, yeah, but I know
exactly where I was.
I know where I
was, on what road.
He said, so do I. And we
matched it up, and we thought,
could this be?
Although the Hathors
are androgynous beings,
meaning balanced
between male and female,
how they view our
current situation
is that it is time that
the feminine nature has
to rise up in balance to the
masculine in its expression
here on Earth.
Earth is held
symbolically as feminine.
We even call it Mother Earth.
So the feminine is degredated
and is held in lower esteem
in many of our
spiritual traditions,
because we have such
disregard for the Earth
itself, and the feminine.
So one of the
myths in society is
that here-- everybody
here-- I don't sense
any virgin births in this room.
So all of us got
here through sex.
A mother and father had coitus,
and there was a big bang,
and our culture says that it
was a mad rush of the sperm
to get to the egg, and the
first sperm to get to the egg
was the winner.
And that's a very
patriarchal, masculine view.
But genetics is now discovering
that it's not quite true.
That the egg actually senses
the approaching horde,
sends out tentacles
of information,
and scans them
before they arrive.
So it's kind of like--
[EXPLOSION SOUND]
[HUMMING "WILLIAM TELL
OVERTURE"]
And the calvary's heading in.
It's a race, and
they've almost got it.
The first one there wins.
Yay, yay, yay!
Gets the trophy of life.
The egg is over here, and the
guys are coming in a horde.
She says, wait a minute, boys.
Just hold back.
I'm not going to take
you or you or you.
Not you.
And, god, definitely not you.
Ah, yes, you.
Come on over.
And she opens the molecular
door just big enough
for the little guy to get in.
[POPPING SOUND]
[SQUEAKING SOUND]
Come in to the inner
sanctum, and let's merge.
And from that moment, mitosis
begins, and [ZOOMING SOUND]
here we are.
So the wisdom of the
egg doesn't just take
the first comer, so to speak.
I didn't plan that pun.
It honestly just happened,
but-- when you find treasures,
you must pick them up, unless
there are strings attached.
So you got here as an expression
of feminine intelligence.
[SOUND OF STORM]
It was a cold, rainy
night in Zurich.
And Judy asked, would
I see if I could
bring forward Mary Magdalene.
And this power came through
that just throttled both of us.
It was so amazing.
I've worked with a lot of
beings of different traditions,
and this one was like, wow.
I don't know what this is, but
this is power and intelligence.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
What Magdalen was
saying is, that the time
has come for the feminine
to be raised up in balance
to the male in a way differently
than has been done in the past.
Living in authenticity with
each other in relationship,
and speaking your truth no
matter how difficult, no matter
how embarrassing it is.
And out of that cauldron--
and it is a cauldron.
It's like a furnace, because
when you speak your truth,
things that are not
true get burned away.
And in that process,
both are elevated--
the male and the female.
I believe that we're
all on our own paths,
and the path of alchemy was
an internal one that you
did yourself, for yourself.
And Magdalen basically
took the blinders off,
and said, well,
there's another way
to look at this, which
is that you can engage
in relationship as a path.
And the alchemy can be shared
between two people that
are peers, and travel
together on this path
to greater understanding
and enlightenment.
But fundamentally, at a deeper
level, what her message is
about is an urgent
message, which
is that if we are to survive,
we must raise the feminine
out the ashes that we have
created as a global culture
for centuries, and have
the two meet together--
male and female together--
not one above the other,
but in equality.
And with that union,
create a new world.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
I think the quest has
actually ended, as I
think about it in this moment.
So I feel that the
work between the human
and the spiritual
part of me has ended.
I've unified the two.
That war is done.
It's not that the
learning has ended,
but the tension between
the human and the spiritual
has ended.
And the final piece of that is
realizing that the boy who sang
to the world, he had
a misunderstanding,
and his misunderstanding
was that he could resolve
the suffering of others.
All he really needs
to do is be a witness,
because everyone is responsible
for their own happiness.
So as the boy who sang to
the world has grown up,
and he's no longer singing
the hopes and dreams of people
into existence, he's singing
a space that allows them
to create that for themselves.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
The lighting crew was
exceptional this evening.
We'd like to thank--
[LAUGHTER]
--the crew.
Yeah.
Ha!